# PPARgamma-lipodystrophy-mutants-reveal-intermolecular-interactions-required-for-enhancer-activation

The scripts in this repository contains codes that was run to create figures in the manuscript PPARγ lipodystrophy mutants reveal intermolecular interactions required for enhancer activation by Madsen et al. 2022.

Summary: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) is the master regulator of adipogenesis, and several mutations in PPARγ are reported to cause lipodystrophy. In this study, we investigate how two mutations of PPARγ, PPARγ2-E379K and -R212Q, which affect distinct domains of PPARγ, interferes with its normal function, thereby gaining insight into the molecular mechanisms of PPARγ function. Using a combination of biochemical and genome-wide approaches we show that mutations affect the function of PPARγ on an overlapping subset of target-enhancers. Mutation within the PPARγ hinge region (R212Q) specifically affect enhancers found in closed chromatin, and our data indicate that the interaction between the hinge-region and DNA appears to be important for remodelling of these enhancers. Further, our data indicate that the mutation found in the PPARγ-ligand binding domain (E379K) affects stabilization of the ternary complex of the PPARγ:RXR heterodimer with DNA. 

Adenoviral delivery of PPARγ in PPARγ-/- MEF-CAR cells:
PPARγ-/-MEF-CAR cells (Madsen et al. 2014) were transduced with adenoviral vectors expressing HA-tagged mPPARγ2-WT, mPPARγ2-R212Q or mPPARγ2-E379K. After two hours of virus exposure, the medium was removed, and cells were treated with medium containing either vehicle dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or 1 µM rosiglitazone (Alexis) for another 6 hours before harvest for protein expression analyses, RNA-, ChIP- and ATAC-seq. All experiments were performed in two independent experiments. 

RNA-seq:
RNA-seq was performed according to the instructions by the manufacturer (Illumina) using 1µg of total RNA for preparation of cDNA libraries. Samples were sequenced on Illumina Hi-Seq 1500, and reads were aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) using STAR with default settings. HOMER makeTagDirectory was used to generate tag directories for all conditions on primary aligned reads. HOMER analyzeRepeats.pl was used to count reads within exons of the mm10 genome with the settings -count exons, -condenseGenes, -noCondensing, -noadj. DESeq2 was used to identify differentially regulated genes between conditions.

ChIP-seq:
ChIP was performed as previously described (Madsen et al. 2014) with antibodies directed against hemagglutinin (HA, Abcam Ab9110; RRID: AB_307019), H3K27ac (Abcam, Ab4729, RRID: AB_2118291), and MED1MED1 (Bethyl Laboratories, A300-793A; RRID: AB_577241). 10 ng immunoprecipitated DNA was prepared for sequencing according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina). 
ChIP-seq libraries were sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 or Illumina Hi-Seq 1500, and reads were aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) using STAR with settings: outFilterMismatchNmax 2, alignIntronMax 1, outSJfilterIntronMaxVsReadN 0, and outFilterMatchNmin 25. Picard Tools (Broad Institute http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) were used to deduplicate primary aligned reads. HOMER makeTagDirectory was used to generate tag directories for all conditions, allowing only one read per position per length of the read (-tbp 1). A pooled tag directory for HA-PPARγWT treated cells were used for peak calling using Homer findPeaks using settings -style factor, -localSize 20000 and the pooled tag directory from control samples as reference. Peaks were extended to 500 bp centered around the peak center. Finally, artifact regions were discarded based on the ENCODE Consortium blacklist for the mm10 genome. Peaks with a tag count of less than 35 tags were filtered away.
PPARγ, MED1MED1 and H3K27Ac ChIP-seq tag counts were quantified in the above defined PPARγWT binding regions using HOMER annotatePeaks with no normalization of sequencing depth (-noadj). Prior to counting H3K27Ac ChIP-seq tags the PPARγ binding sites were extended ±1.5 kb of the peak center to capture more histone ChIP-seq signal, as histone modifications are generally distributed broadly around transcription factor binding sites. Next, we used DESeq2 to 1) call sites which gain MED1 and/or H3K27ac signal upon PPARγWT expression (denoted PPARγ-target enhancers); 2) call sites that were differentially bound by PPARγ, MED1 or acetylated when comparing WT and mutant PPARγ; and 3) obtain PPARγ, MED1 and H3K27Ac counts normalized to the total tag directory size.

Motif analysis:
HA-PPARγWT binding sites were scanned for the PPRE motif from the JASPAR database in a region of 200 bp around the peak center and the motif score was extracted using HOMER annotatePeaks. If more than one PPRE motif was identified within a PPARγ-binding region, the motif with highest motif score was used for further analyses. 
De novo motif search was made using Homer findMotifsGenome with motif length of 15-17 bases and searched within +/-100 bp of peak center of PPARγ-target enhancers. The de novo motif was hereafter used to scan all PPARγ-binding sites using HOMER annotatePeaks. 
To analyse the motif score within sections of the motif, positions files of PPARγ-binding sites were used to extract the sequence from the FASTA sequence of the mm10 reference genome. The de novo motif was extracted within these sequences using Homer2 find, where the threshold for calling a motif was set to -2. The motif score was hereafter calculated within sections; 5’ extension (base 1-4), PPARγ-half site (base 5-10), and RXR-half site (base 12-17).

ATAC-seq:
ATAC-seq was performed on 100.000 cells resuspended in 50 ul tagmentation mix (33 mM Tris-acetate, pH 7.8, 66 mM potassium acetate, 10 mM magnesium acetate, 16% dimethylformamide, 0.01% digitonin and 2,5 µl Tn5 (Nextera, Illumina)). Tagmentation was performed for 30 min at 37°C, shaking at 800 rpm. Tagmented DNA was purified using Qiagen PCR purification kit according to the protocol of the manufacturer. Purified tagmented DNA was prepared for sequencing using dual-unique index primers (Illumina TG Nextera® XT Index Kit) and Q5 High fidelity DNA polymerase (NEB) under the following PCR conditions: 72°C 5 min; 98°C 1 min; 10 cycles 98°C 10 sec, 63°C 30 sec, 72°C 20 sec; 10°C hold, purified in accordance with the protocol of the manufacturer (Illumina) and sequenced on NovaSeq 6000.
Sequenced reads were aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) using STAR with settings: outFilterMismatchNmax 2, alignIntronMax 1, outSJfilterIntronMaxVsReadN 0, and outFilterMatchNmin 25. Primary aligned reads were deduplicated using Picard Tools (Broad Institute http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) whereafter fragments of length <= 120 bp were selected for further analyses (nucleosome free regions) using SAMtools. Tag directories were generated using HOMER makeTagdirectories. Using HOMER analyseRepeats ATAC-seq signal was counted within PPARγ-WT peaks extended ± 250bp around peak center and in bins of 50 bp in a window of 3000 bp centered at the peak center.

Enrichment analysis:
The number of enhancers in the vicinity of PPARγ-target genes relative to the number of enhancers in the vicinity of non PPARγ-target genes was determined using BedTools. Two hundred genes not regulated by PPARγ were randomly selected 10 times, and average number of enhancers was used for normalization.  
